---
layout: post
title: ELI5 What does Brent do for a living?
description: ELI5 is an abbreviation used on Reddit which stands for Explain Like I'm Five.
---

For the past year or so I have been fortunate enough to be a Software
Developer at Madriska, Inc - a software consultancy that has been
developing web-based business software since 2005. I work typically work in
Vancouver, and my co-workers are located and work in Chicago and New
Haven. It is a dream job - I have an incredible amount of autonomy and I
get to work with some of the most kind, inspiring, and clever people
that I know (Brad, Jordan - you guys are amazing). Our customers run
successful businesses and are fun to work with.

To most people I know, this description provides little insight to what I
actually do on a day-to-day basis beyond hunch over a computer and drink coffee.
Software development, especially in the context of a software consultancy, is
surprisingly difficult to explain to an outsider, but I'm going to give it a
shot. This is more of an ELI15 than an ELI5 (thanks Caleb), because I
regrettably do not think I'm capable of articulating this information in a way
that could be understood by a five year old.

### What does a software developer do?
Software is _everywhere_ and there is therefore huge variety in the work that
developers do - the apps on your phone, the system you use for paying your bills,
Facebook, Google, YouTube, your digital watch, genome sequencing/analysis tools,
the dashboard in your car, inventory management and accounting systems
that power businesses, your favorite online store, and the software
that makes it possible to explore Mars with the Curiosity Rover.

Naturally, as the application changes there is also a great deal of specific domain
knowledge that will be required to effectively write software - you
can't create an accounting system if you do not know what debits and
credits are, and you certainly cannot write software to control a
Rover on Mars from Earth unless you understand.. well.. a lot of things.
So beyond technical expertise, developers also learn a lot about
specific topics that their software is written for.

The software I typically work on is the kind of thing that you would
look at through a web browser. Sometimes I add additional functionality to an
online store, such as giving customer service representatives the ability to
place orders on behalf of customers. Often, the work I do is not publicly
visible: many systems we work on are used internally to help our customers make
better business decisions.

I write code that makes the interface work and look pretty. But I also
write the code that makes the applications remember the information you
enter and be able to present it back for you next time you visit the
site, and perform calculations and generate reports based off of it. The
interface is known as the front-end, and the other piece is
known as the back-end. The back-end is a server and usually a database
(which is just another program that is good at store and retrieving data).

That's not to say that I just write code all day - a large part of my
job is speaking with customers to understand what problem they need the
software to solve, then designing and pitching software solutions to them.

### So what is a software consultancy?
Our customers are businesses that have or want to create web applications and
need some help planning, building from scratch, maintaining, and/or updating
them to keep up with what the business needs the applications to do.

The level of help we provide can vary: we can be the only developers on
their applications, either because the needs of the application are too few
to require a full-time developer or the business decides they do not want
to dedicate a team inside of their company to it, or we can just handle
tasks that the businesses' existing team does not have time to work on
or require special knowledge that we have and they do not.

We do not have our own software products that we sell - our revenues are
earned by working on applications for our customers.

### How do you do this from a different country than your co-workers?
What I do is called _remote work_ - myself and my co-workers all work from
different cities across North America, often in our own homes. Thanks to the
work of great software developers before us, we have access to many incredible
applications they made which allow us to talk with each other and with our
customers at any time, either by text or video/voice. For example, Skype
and Google Hangouts. We also have places where we can list the tasks that we
need to accomplish, discuss our progress on them, and share all of that
information with the customers - who are, of course, also free to comment on
the tasks. The specific tool we use is called Trello. We upload all of our code
to a website that allows us to see what other people have done and
comment on the code. This website is called Github.

### Reflection
This exercise was extremely difficult for me, and I still don't think I
did a very good job of explaining my work. If anyone has seen, written, or
think you can write a simple and effective explanation of software development
& the software consultancy business, send it over and I'll update this with links!

If you're not a software developer, why not give this exercise a try -
explain enough of your job to do justice to its complexities, write so that it
can be understood by anyone, and do it in as few words as possible.
